---
layout: home
title: Background
---

The New York City subway is the largest subway system in North America, made up of 472 stations that serve millions of riders every day (MTA). Like the city itself, it is complex and continuously evolving. New expansions seeking to improve access and transportation equity are currently being planned, though most of these projects have been significantly delayed due to funding and political issues (Cardenas, 2025). For example, the Interborough Express light rail project–in the design phase as of Spring 2026–is estimated to serve around 160,000 riders every weekday, connecting "currently underserved areas of Brooklyn and Queens” (MTA, 2026).

Though the MTA-run transit system also incorporates local and express buses, commuter rails, and connects to ferries, for many commuters and residents the subway is the most effective means of transportation across the city. Understanding the spatial distribution and impacts of subway access is an important part of planning future expansions. GIS is a valuable tool for visualizing and analyzing access through the use of methods such as network analysis or the creation of service areas, as well as the ability to integrate various demographic data sources.

**Literature review**

Prior research has applied GIS methods–network analysis in particular–to examine subway access and related subjects. Directly related to the specific geographic context of New York City, Baghestani et al. (2024) analyzed the shortest paths along the road network from census tract centroids to the nearest subway stations across the city’s boroughs within a 10 minute accessibility threshold to assess the spatial distribution of subway accessibility. This analysis was furthered by integrating demographic data, ultimately identifying wide disparities. One finding was that Queens–and more specifically the borough’s black population–had notably lower subway access. Jiang et al. (2021) also used New York City as a case study for urban transit accessibility (including subway access) analyzing open data with the Dijkstra shortest-path algorithm for network analysis to estimate travel time between origins and destinations such as subway stations.

Other relevant studies that didn’t examine New York City similarly apply GIS methods to investigate questions of accessibility. Pira & Hansson (2025) analyzed proximity-based transit station accessibility in Oslo city, Norway, modeling service areas and also conducting network analysis for its benefits in realistically modeling travel and constraints created by the network. Finally, Roubin et al. (2025) created catchment areas from network analysis results in a case study of pharmacy accessibility disparities in Vermont. The biggest takeaway from the overlap of methods and approaches to conceptualizing transit (subway) accessibility issues across all these papers is the benefit of network analysis for better capturing realistic transportation scenarios. The approach to exploring subway access in this project is informed by this takeaway, as well as other aspects of prior research.

[**References**](/figures/background_references.pdf)